# Wandertext-server

Wandertext-server is the abstraction and reimplementation of the stalled
[nywalker-server](@nyscapes/nywalker-server) project that fueled the old,
[NYU](http://nyu.edu)-hosted NYWalker project. It uses
[CouchDB](http://couchdb.apache.org) to provide the backend for
[Wandertext](@muziejus/wandertext), the reimplementation of
[NYWalker](@nyscapes/nywalker).

The database is inflected with a schema generated by
[Relational-Pouch](@pouchdb-community/relational-pouch), which allows the
system to be used with [Ember-Pouch](@pouchdb-community/ember-pouch), and,
hence, [Ember Data](@emberjs/data). 

Much of this repository is dedicated to converting the old NYWalker Postgres
database into something that runs on CouchDB and Ember Data understands.
Additionally, some work done on Wandertext between the demise of NYWalker and
the release of Wandertext is also reflected in the conversion.

## Schema

The schema is straightforward and defined in `./src/schema.js`. There are five
models:

1. `user`, which refers to a person creating or editing data in Wandertext. As
   such, they have many of the other four models.
2. `text`, which is the container for single datasets in Wandertext. In
   NYWalker, this model was called a `Book`, but Wandertext lets us build
   different datasets. It has many `users` and many `entries`.
3. `place`, which refers to a geographical place. These are all provided in
   GeoJSON format, more or less. Each place can have many `users` and
   `entries`.
4. `entry`, which is the atomic driver of the data captured in Wandertext. An
   entry belongs to a `place` and a `text`, but can have many `users`. In
   NYWalker, these were called `Instances`.
5. `flag`, which is a meta object. Filled out by a `user` (to which it
   belongs), a flag can be attached to a `text`, `place`, or `entry` to alert
   to a problem with that other entity. As such, every model can
   definitionally have many flags, except the flag itself.

Because relational-pouch asks not to save ids on the hasMany side of
relationships, the current means of tracking many-to-many relations is by
never saving to the `user`. Instead, the other four models all have a `users`
property that is an array of `user` IDs.

## Model Details

Of course, referring to these CouchDB documents as “Models” relies on the
model-driven, relational structure of Ember Data. Hence, the actual *models*
and their attributes are defined in Wandertext, not in this repository.
Nevertheless, for reference:

### User

* `username` (string): A (hopefully unique) identifier against which
authentication can be done to a credentials provider, such as GitHub.

* `authentication` (string): Which credentials provider to use. Default:
`"github"`.

* `firstName` (string): The first part of the user’s name, which gets bumped
to after the comma when sorting by “last name.” Hence, in a name like “Moacir
P. de Sá Pereira,” `firstName` would be `"Moacir P. de"`. For a name like “Son
Heung-Min,” it would be `null`.

* `lastName` (string): The second part of the user’s name, or the part that
leads when sorting names alphabetically. From the examples above, we get
values of `"Sá Pereira"` and `"Son Heung-Min"`, meaning that in a
bibliography, the names would appear as:
    * Sá Pereira, Moacir P. de
    * Son Heung-Min

* `enabled` (boolean): Whether a user can log in. Default: `false`.

* `superUser` (boolean): Whether a user can create texts in addition to places
and entries. Default: `false`.

* `admin` (boolean): Whether a user can create new users. God mode. Default:
`false`.

* `createdOn` (date): The creation date for the user.

* `modifiedOn` (date): The modification date for the user.

* `nywalkerProperties` (object): A representation of the user from NYWalker,
should they have existed then. This will include, for example, `id`, `name`,
`email`, `username`, `admin`, `added_on`, `modified_on`, `firstname`,
`lastname`, and `enabled`.

* `entries`, `flags`, `places`, and `texts`: These represent the user’s
`hasMany` relations.

### Text

* `name` (string): An identifier of the text in question.

* `slug` (string): A (hopefully unique), url-safe version of the name.

* `popupTemplate` (string): An HTML/handlebars template that determines how
popups appear in Leaflet for entries associated with this text.

* `markdownName` (string): A Markdown rendering of the name. For example, for
a `name` of `"Bāburnāma"`, the `markdownName` can be `"_Bāburnāma_"`, so that the
name can be rendered in italics.

* `markdownBlurb` (string): A blurb describing the text, written in Markdown.

* `url` (string): A url associated with the text.

* `imgSrc` (string): A url pointing to an image associated with the text. This
can be the cover of a book, say.

* `imgCredit` (string): A string describing how the image should be credited.

* `imgHref` (string): A link that resolves when the user clicks on the image.

* `entryProperties` (array): An array of property objects. A property object
defines a property that entries belonging to this text are expected to have.
For example, if the text is a book, every entry may be expected to have a
`page` property. That is defined here. If a text is a set of interviews, than
every entry (interview) can be expected to have an `interviewee` property.
Furthermore, the order of property objects determines the order in which the
input fields are presented in data entry. Each property object can expect to have
the following properties:
    * `name` (string): The name of the property, such as `"page"` or `"interviewee"`
    * `type` (string): What JavaScript type to expect. One of `"string"`,
    `"number"`, or `"boolean"`.
    * `inputLabel` (string): The label corresponding to the input field for
    adding this property, such as `"Page Number"` or `"Interviewee Code"`.
    * `helpText` (string): The text underneath the input field that appears as
    help text.
    * `readOnly` (boolean): Whether this field can be changed or not. Useful
    when importing previously created data.

* `entrySort` (array): An array of property objects’ `.name` properties,
defining the order in which entries are sorted by default. For a value of
`["page", "sequence"]`, for example, the entries would first be sorted by
their `page` property and then by their `sequence` property.

* `createdOn` (date): The creation date for the text.

* `modifiedOn` (date): The modification date for the text.

* `nywalkerProperties` (object): A list of old properties from NYWalker. This
could include `id`, `slug`, `author`, `title`, `isbn`, `year`, `url`, `cover`,
`added_on`, and `modified_on`.

* `users`: This represents the text’s `hasMany` relations.

### Place

* `type` (string): `"Feature"`

* `bbox` (array): An array representing the bounding box of the place. As the
  [GeoJSON spec](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7946) describes the format:
  “The value of the bbox member MUST be an array of length 2*n where n is the
  number of dimensions represented in the contained geometries, with all axes
  of the most southwesterly point followed by all axes of the more
  northeasterly point.  The axes order of a bbox follows the axes order of
  geometries.”

* `geometry` (object): An object with two properties. `type` defaults to
`"Point"` and `coordinates` is an array of the format `[<longitude>, <latitude>]`.

* `properties` (object): A places properties are all nested in here, in
following the GeoJSON spec. As such:
    * `name` (string): A name for the place
    * `slug` (string): A (hopefully unique), url-safe version of the name.
    * `confidence` (number): A number between 0 and 3 indicating a subjective
    sense of confidence that this is an appropriate representation of the
    place in question.
    * `source` (string): The source for the coordinates. Typical responses are
    a Wikipedia link, [Geonames](http://geonames.org), or Google Maps.
    * `geonameId` (number): If the place is harvested from Geonames, this is
    its id.
    * `note` (string): A note about the place, if needed.
    * `createdOn` (date): The creation date for the place.
    * `modifiedOn` (date): The modification date for the place.
    * `nywalkerProperties` (object): A list of old properties from NYWalker.
    This could include `id`, `slug`, `name`, `added_on`, `lat`, `lon`,
    `confidence` (as string), `source`, `geonameid` (as string), `what3word`,
    `bounding_box_string`, `user_id`, `flagged`, `note`, and `geom`.

* `users`: This represents the place’s `hasMany` relations.

### Entry

* `attestedName` (string): The string by which the entry’s place is referred
to, such as `"NYC"` for the place `"New York City"`.

* `note` (string): A note about the entry.

* `createdOn` (date): The creation date for the entry.

* `modifiedOn` (date): The modification date for the entry.

* `nywalkerProperties` (object): A list of old properties from NYWalker. This
could include `id`, `page`, `sequence`, `text`, `added_on`, `modified_on`,
`place_id`, `user_id`, `book_id`, `flagged`, `note`, and `special`.

* `text` and `place`: These represent the entry’s `belongsTo` relations.

* `users`: This represents the entry’s `hasMany` relations.

### Flag

* `comment` (string): The text of the flag.

* `createdOn` (date): The creation date for the flag.

* `modifiedOn` (date): The modification date for the flag.

* `nywalkerProperties` (object): A list of old properties from NYWalker. This
could include `id`, `comment`, `object_type`, `object_id`, `added_on`, and
`user_id`.

* `user`, `entry`, `text` and `place`: These represent the flag’s `belongsTo` relations.

## History

The old version of the project relied on writing an entire
[JSON:API](https://jsonapi.org/) server that could integrate with an
[Ember](http://emberjs.com) client. This was a self-defeating proposition,
especially with a development team of one person.  Now, instead, the server
relies on the api implementation built into
[CouchDB](http://couchdb.apache.org). 

As such, this side of the project mostly involves providing a reproducable
means by which the old NYWalker SQL database is converted into a CouchDB
database for use by the [Wandertext-client](@muziejus/textwalker-client).
Furthermore, this repository tracks how especially the documents pertaining to
places are restructured to put them more in line with turning Wandertext on
the whole into a part of the [World-Historical
Gazetteer](http://whgazetteer.org/) through the [Linked
Places](https://github.com/LinkedPasts/linked-places) format.

## Abstraction & Linking

This repository differs from the earlier version in two, fundamental ways,
both of which make the project more viable as a contributor to human
knowledge. 

First, the database’s document structure abstracts the old relational database
data structure of NYWalker. NYWalker had, effectively, three models: `Book`,
`Place`, and `Instance`. `Instance`s belonged to one `Book` and to one
`Place`. Because of that, the data structure of the `Instance` was
predictable. There would be, for example, an integer captured that was the
page number for the `Instance`. Similarly, `Book`, the container object, also
had predictable properties, like an author or an ISBN number. Now, instead of
`Book`, `Instance`s (called `Entry`s belong to an abstract `Text` document. Furthermore, the
data structure of an `Text`’s `Entry`s is defined by the `Text` itself,
not by the schema of the database. In this way, for example, one `Text`
could be a book, where each `Entry` has a page number, while another
`Text` could be an audio recording, where each `Entry` has a timecode.

Second, while NYWalker was designed with open access to its data in mind, it
was implemented in an ad hoc manner, and the relationships between `Place`s
and gazetteers was… inconsistent. Some places were linked to
[GeoNames](http://geonames.org) entries, and many places were not. With
Wandertext, `Place`s will link to the WHGazetteer, contributing to a federated
system of geographical information management.

## Roadmap

1. Convert existing SQL database to sqlite for portability ✅
2. Convert sqlite database to CouchDB ✅ 
3. Build Wandertext client
4. Deepen `Place` model to match Linked Places format.
